# Lecture 2: Experimental design, reliability, and validity

## Causality
- Correlation between the variables.  
  _(If A changes, B should change)_
- Temporal asymmetry (time precedence) between the variables.  
  _(A happens before B happens)_
- Elimination of any common causal variable (confounding variables).  
  _(A happens because of B, not because of some other factor C)_

## Reliability
The stability or consistency with which we measure something.

## Validity
Accuracy of a result.

### Internal Validity

No errors internal to the design of the research

- **History**  
  Things that have changed in the participants’ environment other than caused by independent variable.
- **Testing**  
  Changing caused by pre-test
- **Instrumentation**  
  Change caused by difference in measurement instrumentation between pre-test and post-test .
- **Regression**  
  Statistical regression: a problem of extreme values or a tendency for random errors to move group results toward the average
  - Select extreme group (more likely to become less extreme).
  - Extreme score on a test likely to become less extreme in a second test.
- **Mortality**  
  Participant dropping out of the experiment (what was the cause?
- **Maturation**  
  Growth, change or development in participants unrelated to independent variable.
- **Selection**  
  Initial difference between groups prior to study (participants will not form equivalent groups).
- **Selection by maturation interaction**  
  Initial groups are equal but over time change by maturation which is not caused by independent variable.
- **Ambiguity about causal direction**  
  Is the independent variable causing change in dependent variable or the other way around?
- **Diffusion of treatment**  
  Groups/conditions are effecting change in other groups/conditions. (e.g. members of one group are talking with members of another group).
- **Compensatory equalization of treatments**  
  Situation where control group needs to be compensated because they did not receive treatment.
- **Compensatory rivalry**  
  Group members change their behaviour to rival member in another group

### External Validity
- **Selection**
  Findings being specific to the group studied
- **Setting**  
  Findings being specific to the particular context in which the study took place
- **History**  
  Specific and unique historical experiences may determine or affect the findings
- **Construct effects**  
  The particular constructs studied may be specific to the group studied 

## True Experiments
- **Post-test-only randomized controlled trail**
  - One factor being tested.  
  - Two randomly assigned groups to either condition: with factor X or without factor X.  
  - Post-test.
- **Post-test-only two treatment comparison**
  - One factor being tested, but two versions of it.  
  - Two randomly assigned groups to either version of this factor.  
  - Post-test.
- **Pre-test post-test randomized controlled trail**
  - One factor being tested.  
  - Two randomly assigned groups.  
  - Pre-test to test previous knowledge.  
  - Post-test.

  Needs fewer people, but people may gain knowledge by the pre-test.
- **Full Factoral design** (2x2 design)  
  - Two factors being tested.
  - Four randomly assigned groups (A and B, -A and B, A and -B, -A and -B).
  - Post-test.

  Can become very complex.
- **Matching pairs**
  - Equal participants are paired (e.g. same gender together)
  - Randomly split the pair to either group.
  - Post-test.
  
  More equal groups, but matching increases fast with multiple criteria. It could also require a pre-test.
- **Randomized block design**
  - Similar participants are first divided into blocks (e.g. age under 18, 18-50, above 50)
  - Participants from each block randomly assigned to the different conditions.
  - Post-test.
- **Repeated measure design** (within-subjects)
  - Not participants doing one condition, but multiple.
  - Post-test.
  
  _Four algorithms, show results of those without telling which came from which, let participants vote on the results_  
  
  **Order effect**: the order matters (people get tired, or change their mind / learn during the experiment)  
  **Counterbalancing**: let half start with A then B, other half with B then A  
  **Latin square**:  
  ABCD  
  DABC  
  CDAB  
  DABC
- **Mixed design** (combinatino of between- and within-subjects)
  - Half of the people get assigned to different groups, other half does the within-subjects design.
  - Post-test.

## Non-true Experiments
- **Quasi-experimental design**  
  - Single-group post-test-only
  - Pre-test post-test non-equivalent groups
  - Interrupted time series design
- **Signle case experimental**  
  Focus on individuals instead of groups
- **Non-experimental fixed design**  
  Lack active manipulation of situation by experimenter
  - Cross-sectional study (no control on independent variables)
  - Longitudinal design (collect data over longer time, e.g. how people sleep over time)

## Sample size
Determine size by:
- Practical limits (e.g. money)
- Max error size (base on margin)
- Effect size that is still of interest (calculate based on expectations using GPower)
