# Lecture 4: Generalized linear models

## Frequency tables
x^2 = sum ((O-E)^2 / E)  
where O = observed and E = expected

## Chi square test
1. Independence of observations.
2. Nominal data.
3. Each observed person (or case) must appear in only one of the frequency cells.
4. No more than 20% of the expected frequency cell counts should be less tahn 5 in large contingency table. For small tables each expected frequency cell count should be greater than 5.

*“There was a significant association between User interface Type and whether or not having completed the task χ2 (2, N = 190) = 29.98, p < .001.”*

## Comparing with a constant
Compare with the norm.  
1. Independence of observations.
2. Interval (or ratio) data.
3. Data are from normally distributed population.
4. Error is normal distributed.

*"The participants rated the File Control (M = 5.90, SD = 1.68) higher than the norm value of 5.29, t (33) = 2.12, p = .042."*

## Comparing between two groups  
1. Independence of observations.
2. Interval (or ratio) data.
3. Data are from normally distributed population.
4. Homogeneity of variance (variances in populations are roughly equal)

Model comparison: f() = a vs f(x) = a + bx

*"Students that received textual corrective feedback did not hadve significantly (t (59) = 1.37, p = .18) different post test score (M = 109.52, SD = 19.93) that the students that received textual corrective and explanatory feedback (M = 116.17, SD = 18.04).*

## Paired comparison

*"On average students scored significantly higher (F(1,90), p < .001, B = -29.12) after the training (M = 113.13, SD = 21.27) than before the training (M = 84.01 , SD = 19.77)."

## Comparing multiple levels
1. Independence observations.
2. Interval (or ratio) data.
3. Data are from a normally distributed population (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test).
4. Error is normally distributed.
5. Homogeneity of variance (Levene's test).

*"A Linear Model analysis was conducted to test the difference between cohorts on the exam score. The results found a significant effect (F(3,628) = 19.93, p < .001) for the cohorts on the exam score."*

## Post-hoc testing
Compare the different categories.  

Calculate the chance of not making an error:  
alpha_{fw} = 1 - (1 - alpha_{pc})^c  
where alpha_{fw} = familywise Type I error rate,  
alpha_{pc} = per comparison Type I error rate,  
c = the number of comparisons

**Planned comparison** (a priori)  
- Comparison that is planned prior to the data collection phase.
- Number of comparison is small, no additional adjustments to control overall Type I error rate needed.

**Unplanned comparison** (post-hoc)  
- Comparison that researcher decides to conduct after data have been collected.
- Number of comparison is small, additional adjustments to control overall Type I error rate needed.

## Multiple factors
Multiple independent variables.

1. Independence of observations.
2. Interval (or ratio) data.
3. Data are from a normally distributed population.
4. Homogeneity of variance.

## Simple effect analysis (two-way interaction)
Breaking down the interaction. Looking at one independent variable at individual level of another independent variable.

## Interval level independent variable (regression analysis)
The dependent variable has an interval level.

1. Relation between independent variable(s) and dependent variable is linear.
2. Errors are independent.
3. Error is normally distributed.
4. Error is distributed with constant variance (y_i = B_0 _ + B_1 x_1 + B_2 x_2 + ... + B_n x_n + e_i)

## Generalized linear models

**Poisson distribution**
A discrete distribution.
- Describes count data (number of times an event occurs in a given interval).
- Number of possible occurrences in any interval is unlimited.
- Occurrences are independent.
- Average number of occurrences must remain the same from interval to interval.

**Gaussian distribution** ("normaalverdeling")
- Has a "bell curve"
- Mean = median = mode
- Symmetric in center

**Gamma distribution**
A continuous distribution.
- The number of possible occurrences in any unit of measurement is not limited to a fixed number.
- The occurrences are independent.
- The average number of occurrences must remain the same from unit to unit.


## Logistic regression
With a dependent variable that is binary (e.g. choose either "Yes I would use this system" or "No I would not use this system")
- Linearity: linear relationship between any continuous predictors and the log of the outcome variable.
- Independence of errors.
- Multicollinearity: i.e. predictors should not be too highly correlated.
